README.md, before:

![alt telegram-bash-system-monitoring](https://github.com/russellgrapes/telegram-bash-system-monitoring/blob/main/placeholder.png)

# Telegram Bash System Monitoring Script

A versatile bash script to monitor various system resources and alert via Telegram messenger.

## Features

- **Telegram Alerts**: Sends alerts to a specified Telegram group/user.
- **Reboot Detection**: Notifies when the server has been rebooted.
- **Load Averages**: Allows for user-defined thresholds or auto-generated thresholds based on hardware.
- **Comprehensive Monitoring**: Monitors CPU, RAM, Disk, and CPU temperature with user-defined thresholds.
- **SSH, SFTP Session Monitoring**: Monitors new SSH, SFTP login sessions with the ability to exclude IPs or IP ranges.
- **Maintenance Mode**: Utilizes a lock file that can be controlled from other scripts to prevent alerts during maintenance.
- **Fast and Slow Monitoring Intervals**: Separates metrics into fast and slow checks for tailored alert responsiveness.
- **CLI Feedback**: Provides status and notifications in the command-line interface (CLI).

## Usage

The `system-monitoring.sh` script offers various command-line options for monitoring system resources:

- `--NAME <ServerName>`: Assign a custom name to the server to distinguish notifications from different servers.
- `--CPU <threshold>`: Set a CPU usage alert threshold as a percentage (%).
- `--RAM <threshold>`: Set a RAM usage alert threshold as a percentage (%).
- `--DISK <threshold>`: Set a disk usage alert threshold as a percentage (%).
- `--DISK-TARGET <mount_point> `: Specifies the mount point to monitor for disk usage. Must be used with --DISK.
- `--TEMP <threshold>`: Set a CPU temperature alert threshold in degrees Celsius (°C).
- `--LA1 [threshold]`: Set a threshold for 1-minute Load Average. Without a specified threshold, the script uses an auto-threshold based on the hardware.
- `--LA5 [threshold]`: Set a threshold for 5-minute Load Average. If omitted, the script defaults to an auto-threshold of 75% of the CPU cores.
- `--LA15 [threshold]`: Set a threshold for 15-minute Load Average. If omitted, the script defaults to an auto-threshold of 50% of the CPU cores.
- `--SSH-LOGIN`: Enable monitoring of SSH login activity, issuing alerts for any new sessions that do not match the specified excluded IPs or IP ranges.
- `--SFTP-MONITOR`: Enable monitoring of SFTP activity, issuing alerts for any new sessions that do not match the specified excluded IPs or IP ranges.
- `--REBOOT`: Monitor the system for reboots and send a notification upon system restart.
  
*Alerts are sent to Telegram when thresholds are exceeded.

## Configuration

The script can be configured via the following environment variables in the script body:

- `TELEGRAMM_LOCK_STATE`: The file path for the lock state file that controls alert messaging.
- `SSH_ACTIVITY_LOGINS`: The file path where the script logs current SSH session logins.
- `SFTP_ACTIVITY_LOGINS`: The file path where the script logs current SFTP session logins.
- `SSH_ACTIVITY_EXCLUDED_IPS`: A list of IP addresses or CIDR ranges excluded from SSH login alerts.
- `LAST_BOOT_TIME_FILE`: The file path for logging the last system boot time, used by the --REBOOT option.
- `HOST_NAME`: An default identifier for the server that also can be set via the --NAME command-line option.
- `FAST_CHECK_INTERVAL`: The interval, in seconds, at which the script performs fast checks for rapid-response metrics (CPU, RAM, SSH logins and 1-minute Load Average).
- `SLOW_CHECK_INTERVAL`: The interval, in seconds, at which the script performs slow checks for metrics that do not require immediate action (Disk Usage, CPU Temperature, Reboot monitoring and longer Load Averages).

# Telegram System Monitoring Installation

Follow these steps to install and set up the system-monitoring.sh script on your server.

## Install Required Packages

Install the main required packages:

```bash
sudo apt-get install bc ipcalc curl
```

Note: The script will check for any additional required packages during runtime and will notify you if any are missing.

## Download Script

Download the script directly using `curl`:

```bash
curl -O https://raw.githubusercontent.com/russellgrapes/telegram-bash-system-monitoring/main/system-monitoring.sh
```

## Make the Script Executable

Change the script's permissions to make it executable:

```bash
chmod +x system-monitoring.sh
```

## Running the Script

When you run the script for the first time, it will prompt you to create a secrets file with your Telegram GROUP_ID and BOT_TOKEN. The script will then test the connection to Telegram. If successful, it will send a test message to your Telegram group and print a success message. If there is an error, it will notify you and exit.

Run the script with the desired thresholds:
```bash
./system-monitoring.sh --LA1 --LA5 --CPU 80 --RAM 70 --DISK 90 --SSH-LOGIN
```

The monitoring script is now ready to use. It will check the specified thresholds and send alerts to your Telegram group when conditions are met. For best practice, consider adding it to your crontab with the reboot option to ensure it runs automatically after each system restart.

## Add Script to Crontab

Edit your crontab file to include the monitoring script:

```bash
crontab -e
```

Add the following line to run the script at reboot:

```bash
@reboot /path/to/system-monitoring.sh --LA15 --CPU 80 --RAM 70 --DISK 90 --SSH-LOGIN --SFTP-MONITOR --REBOOT

# Optional monitoring for other mount points
@reboot /path/to/system-monitoring.sh --DISK 90 --DISK-TARGET /mnt/my_disk1
@reboot /path/to/system-monitoring.sh --DISK 90 --DISK-TARGET /mnt/my_disk2
```

Replace `/path/to/system-monitoring.sh` with the actual path to your script.

## Configuration

To configure the script settings, open it with your text editor. For example, using nano:

```bash
nano system-monitoring.sh
```

The script now automatically handles the creation of the secrets file and tests the connection to Telegram. If you need to update your GROUP_ID or BOT_TOKEN, you can delete the secrets file located at `/etc/telegram.secrets` and rerun the script to recreate it.

For instructions on how to obtain your Telegram `GROUP_ID` and `BOT_TOKEN`, see the section below.

### Setting up Telegram Bot and Group

To receive alerts from the monitoring script, you'll need to set up a Telegram bot and determine the group ID where the bot will send notifications.

#### Creating a Telegram Bot

1. Open the Telegram app and search for "@BotFather", which is the official bot for creating other bots.
2. Send the `/newbot` command to BotFather and follow the instructions. You will be asked to provide a name and a username for your bot.
3. After the bot is created, BotFather will provide a token for your new bot. Keep this token secure as it will be used to control the bot.

#### Getting the Group ID

1. Create a new group in Telegram or use an existing one where you want to receive alerts.
2. Add your newly created bot to the group as a member.
3. Send a dummy message to the group to initialize the chat with the bot.
4. Visit `https://api.telegram.org/bot<YourBOTToken>/getUpdates` in your web browser, replacing `<YourBOTToken>` with the token you received from BotFather.
5. Look for a JSON response that contains `"chat":{"id":` followed by a long number. This number is your group ID. Note it down as you will need to enter it into the script's configuration.

## Contributing

Contributions are what make the open-source community such an amazing place to learn, inspire, and create. Any contributions you make are **greatly appreciated**.

If you have a suggestion that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request. You can also simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".

Don't forget to give the project a star! Thanks again!

## License

Distributed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE` for more information.

## Author

I write loops to skip out on life's hoops.

Russell Grapes - [www.grapes.team](https://grapes.team)

Project Link: [https://github.com/russellgrapes/telegram-bash-system-monitoring](https://github.com/russellgrapes/telegram-bash-system-monitoring)

Commit message:

t p# This is a combination of 4 commits.
写死tg

fix

fix

fix

fix

Fix: Allow negative GROUP-ID values

fix

README.md, after:

![alt telegram-bash-system-monitoring](https://github.com/russellgrapes/telegram-bash-system-monitoring/blob/main/placeholder.png)

# Telegram Bash System Monitoring Script

A versatile bash script to monitor various system resources and alert via Telegram messenger.

## Features

- **Telegram Alerts**: Sends alerts to a specified Telegram group/user.
- **Reboot Detection**: Notifies when the server has been rebooted.
- **Load Averages**: Allows for user-defined thresholds or auto-generated thresholds based on hardware.
- **Comprehensive Monitoring**: Monitors CPU, RAM, Disk, and CPU temperature with user-defined thresholds.
- **SSH, SFTP Session Monitoring**: Monitors new SSH, SFTP login sessions with the ability to exclude IPs or IP ranges.
- **Maintenance Mode**: Utilizes a lock file that can be controlled from other scripts to prevent alerts during maintenance.
- **Fast and Slow Monitoring Intervals**: Separates metrics into fast and slow checks for tailored alert responsiveness.
- **CLI Feedback**: Provides status and notifications in the command-line interface (CLI).

## Usage

The `system-monitoring.sh` script offers various command-line options for monitoring system resources:

### Required Arguments:
- `--GROUP-ID <group_id>`: Telegram group ID where alerts will be sent (required).
- `--BOT-TOKEN <bot_token>`: Telegram bot token for authentication (required).

### Optional Arguments:
- `--NAME <ServerName>`: Assign a custom name to the server to distinguish notifications from different servers.
- `--CPU <threshold>`: Set a CPU usage alert threshold as a percentage (%).
- `--RAM <threshold>`: Set a RAM usage alert threshold as a percentage (%).
- `--DISK <threshold>`: Set a disk usage alert threshold as a percentage (%).
- `--DISK-TARGET <mount_point>`: Specifies the mount point to monitor for disk usage. Must be used with --DISK.
- `--TEMP <threshold>`: Set a CPU temperature alert threshold in degrees Celsius (°C).
- `--LA1 [threshold]`: Set a threshold for 1-minute Load Average. Without a specified threshold, the script uses an auto-threshold based on the hardware.
- `--LA5 [threshold]`: Set a threshold for 5-minute Load Average. If omitted, the script defaults to an auto-threshold of 75% of the CPU cores.
- `--LA15 [threshold]`: Set a threshold for 15-minute Load Average. If omitted, the script defaults to an auto-threshold of 50% of the CPU cores.
- `--SSH-LOGIN`: Enable monitoring of SSH login activity, issuing alerts for any new sessions that do not match the specified excluded IPs or IP ranges.
- `--SFTP-MONITOR`: Enable monitoring of SFTP activity, issuing alerts for any new sessions that do not match the specified excluded IPs or IP ranges.
- `--REBOOT`: Monitor the system for reboots and send a notification upon system restart.
  
*Alerts are sent to Telegram when thresholds are exceeded.

## Configuration

The script can be configured via the following environment variables in the script body:

- `TELEGRAMM_LOCK_STATE`: The file path for the lock state file that controls alert messaging.
- `SSH_ACTIVITY_LOGINS`: The file path where the script logs current SSH session logins.
- `SFTP_ACTIVITY_LOGINS`: The file path where the script logs current SFTP session logins.
- `SSH_ACTIVITY_EXCLUDED_IPS`: A list of IP addresses or CIDR ranges excluded from SSH login alerts.
- `LAST_BOOT_TIME_FILE`: The file path for logging the last system boot time, used by the --REBOOT option.
- `HOST_NAME`: An default identifier for the server that also can be set via the --NAME command-line option.
- `FAST_CHECK_INTERVAL`: The interval, in seconds, at which the script performs fast checks for rapid-response metrics (CPU, RAM, SSH logins and 1-minute Load Average).
- `SLOW_CHECK_INTERVAL`: The interval, in seconds, at which the script performs slow checks for metrics that do not require immediate action (Disk Usage, CPU Temperature, Reboot monitoring and longer Load Averages).

# Telegram System Monitoring Installation

Follow these steps to install and set up the system-monitoring.sh script on your server.

## Install Required Packages

Install the main required packages:

```bash
sudo apt-get install bc ipcalc curl
```

Note: The script will check for any additional required packages during runtime and will notify you if any are missing.

## Download Script

Download the script directly using `curl`:

```bash
curl -O https://raw.githubusercontent.com/junyixie/telegram-bash-system-monitoring/main/system-monitoring.sh
```

## Make the Script Executable

Change the script's permissions to make it executable:

```bash
chmod +x system-monitoring.sh
```

## Running the Script

Run the script with your Telegram credentials and the desired monitoring thresholds:

```bash
./system-monitoring.sh \
  --GROUP-ID -<your-tg-group-id> \
  --BOT-TOKEN <your-tg-bot-token> \
  --CPU 80 --RAM 70 --DISK 90 --SSH-LOGIN
```

**Note**: Replace the GROUP_ID and BOT_TOKEN values with your actual Telegram credentials (see "Setting up Telegram Bot and Group" section below).

The monitoring script is now ready to use. It will check the specified thresholds and send alerts to your Telegram group when conditions are met. For best practice, consider adding it to your crontab with the reboot option to ensure it runs automatically after each system restart.

## Add Script to Crontab

Edit your crontab file to include the monitoring script:

```bash
crontab -e
```

Add the following line to run the script at reboot:

```bash
@reboot /path/to/system-monitoring.sh --GROUP-ID -<your-tg-group-id> --BOT-TOKEN <your-tg-bot-token> --LA15 --CPU 80 --RAM 70 --DISK 90 --SSH-LOGIN --SFTP-MONITOR --REBOOT

# Optional monitoring for other mount points
@reboot /path/to/system-monitoring.sh --GROUP-ID -<your-tg-group-id> --BOT-TOKEN <your-tg-bot-token> --DISK 90 --DISK-TARGET /mnt/my_disk1
@reboot /path/to/system-monitoring.sh --GROUP-ID -<your-tg-group-id> --BOT-TOKEN <your-tg-bot-token> --DISK 90 --DISK-TARGET /mnt/my_disk2
```

**Important**: Replace `/path/to/system-monitoring.sh` with the actual path to your script, and update the GROUP_ID and BOT_TOKEN with your actual Telegram credentials.

## Configuration

The script requires Telegram credentials to be passed via command line arguments (--GROUP-ID and --BOT-TOKEN). 

To configure other script settings such as check intervals and excluded IPs, open it with your text editor. For example, using nano:

```bash
nano system-monitoring.sh
```

Key configuration variables in the script:
- `FAST_CHECK_INTERVAL`: Interval for urgent resource checks (default: 60 seconds)
- `SLOW_CHECK_INTERVAL`: Interval for less urgent checks (default: 1800 seconds)
- `SSH_ACTIVITY_EXCLUDED_IPS`: Array of IP addresses/CIDR ranges to exclude from SSH/SFTP alerts
- `TELEGRAMM_LOCK_STATE`: Path to lock file that controls alert sending

For instructions on how to obtain your Telegram `GROUP_ID` and `BOT_TOKEN`, see the section below.

### Setting up Telegram Bot and Group

To receive alerts from the monitoring script, you'll need to set up a Telegram bot and determine the group ID where the bot will send notifications.

#### Creating a Telegram Bot

1. Open the Telegram app and search for "@BotFather", which is the official bot for creating other bots.
2. Send the `/newbot` command to BotFather and follow the instructions. You will be asked to provide a name and a username for your bot.
3. After the bot is created, BotFather will provide a token for your new bot. Keep this token secure as it will be used to control the bot.

#### Getting the Group ID

1. Create a new group in Telegram or use an existing one where you want to receive alerts.
2. Add your newly created bot to the group as a member.
3. Send a dummy message to the group to initialize the chat with the bot.
4. Visit `https://api.telegram.org/bot<YourBOTToken>/getUpdates` in your web browser, replacing `<YourBOTToken>` with the token you received from BotFather.
5. Look for a JSON response that contains `"chat":{"id":` followed by a long number. This number is your group ID. Note it down as you will need to enter it into the script's configuration.

## Contributing

Contributions are what make the open-source community such an amazing place to learn, inspire, and create. Any contributions you make are **greatly appreciated**.

If you have a suggestion that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request. You can also simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".

Don't forget to give the project a star! Thanks again!

## License

Distributed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE` for more information.

## Author

I write loops to skip out on life's hoops.

Russell Grapes - [www.grapes.team](https://grapes.team)

Project Link: [https://github.com/russellgrapes/telegram-bash-system-monitoring](https://github.com/russellgrapes/telegram-bash-system-monitoring)
